---
layout: post
title: Zen & The Art of Code Maintenance
categories: blog
---

This post was inspired by a book of a similar name: *Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance*. The author says of the title: 

>It should in no way be associated with that great body of factual information relating to orthodox Zen Buddhist practice. It’s not very factual on motorcycles, either. 

The same holds true for this writing. I won’t be talking about Zen, or code for that matter. I just want to share a few of my own philosophies in maintaining a happy & healthy work-life balance. I wouldn't say I'm the happiest person.. I have good days & bad just like anyone else. But I will say that my level of stress usually hovers around sea breeze to It's also worth mentioning that I don't have 

Agree or disagree, then take a moment to reflect.

## Learn about yourself ##

How do you perceive yourself? How do others perceive you? Is what you're doing at work fulfilling? Outside of work? I believe that the only way to expect a  

## Don't go with your first idea ##

Ever. It might be The Best Idea You've Ever Had™. It would probably even work quite well in the end. But it could be better. Pushing yourself to explore other directions can only do two things. 1) You'll discover an even better solution that makes the first one look weak, or 2) It will re-enforce the strengths of an earlier version, and expose what needs improvement. The third possibility is that none of your ideas are working very well. Take a break and come back to it.

## Don't take yourself (or your work) to seriously ##

Even if you're developing a cure for cancer, it's really not that important in the grand scheme of things. And you're not developing a cure for cancer, so lighten up a bit. Be passionate and dedicated to your work, but keep your ego in check. Don't label yourself a guru, or a rockstar, or a ninja. You're none of these things, and you immediately look like a bit of an asshole. Be honest and humble in your work, and everyone will be a lot happier (including yourself).

## Have a "productive" hobby ##

This one is key for me. Do something often, that isn't work, but that still feels productive. Something that you can do 4–7 hours per week and feel completely guilt-free, and even proud of. It should be something totally unrelated to your job, and even better if it's not something you feel obligated to do (like go to the gym). You should enjoy doing it so much that you naturally find time to do it no matter how busy you are. Try to be just as passionate about this as your work, if not more so. For me, it's skateboarding. For others it's painting, playing guitar, bird watching, knitting, cycling, stamp collecting, photography, etc. A good hobby will force you to forget about work, lower stress, clear your mind, and make you feel refreshed. Try to avoid hobbies that involve a screen, have strict time tables, or can only be done inside. Hobbies that can be done solo as well as with other people are ideal.

## Get high ##

Responsibly, of course. I'm not just talking about drugs here, that's the laziest option. It's about changing your mindset, your environment, and seeing things from a different perspective. This could be via meditation, or by running for a ridiculous distance, or getting lost in a techno song (MDMA optional). Whatever works for you, these moments give your brain a chance to experience the world in a new light, 